.TH BASE122 1 "February 2026" "BaseX 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
base122 \- base122 encode/decode data and print to standard output
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B base122
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Base122 encode or decode FILE, or standard input, to standard output.
.PP
Base122 encoding is the most efficient ASCII-safe encoding, achieving
approximately 12.5% overhead by using 7 bits per byte with UTF-8
continuation bytes. This is significantly better than Base64 (33%),
Base85 (25%), or Base91 (23%).
.PP
This implementation includes CPU-specific optimizations (AVX2, BMI2)
for maximum performance on modern Intel and AMD processors.
.PP
With no FILE, or when FILE is \-, read standard input.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d, \-\-decode
Decode data
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-wrap=COLS
Wrap encoded lines after COLS characters (default 76).
Use 0 to disable line wrapping
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-ignore\-garbage
When decoding, ignore non\-alphabet characters
.TP
.B \-\-cpu\-info
Show detected CPU features and performance characteristics, then exit
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display help message and exit
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output version information and exit
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.B Encode a file:
.RS
base122 input.txt > output.b122
.RE
.PP
.B Decode a file:
.RS
base122 \-d output.b122 > input.txt
.RE
.PP
.B Encode from stdin:
.RS
echo "Hello World" | base122
.RE
.PP
.B Check CPU optimizations:
.RS
base122 \-\-cpu\-info
.RE
.SH PERFORMANCE
On systems with AVX2 support (Intel Haswell and later, AMD Excavator and later),
base122 can achieve encoding speeds of 4\-6 GB/s. On older CPUs without SIMD support,
performance is approximately 1\-2 GB/s.
.PP
The tool automatically detects available CPU features at runtime and selects
the optimal code path.
.SH TECHNICAL DETAILS
Base122 encodes 7 bits per output byte using UTF\-8 continuation bytes (0x80\-0xFF range).
Certain illegal bytes (NUL, LF, CR, ", &, backslash) are escaped using a two\-byte sequence.
.PP
This encoding is ideal for embedding binary data in text formats that support UTF\-8
but have restrictions on certain ASCII control characters.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Failure (invalid input, decoding error, etc.)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR base64 (1),
.BR base32 (1),
.BR base85 (1),
.BR base91 (1)
.PP
Base122 specification: https://github.com/kevinAlbs/Base122
.SH AUTHOR
BaseX Project
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/yourusername/basex/issues
