.TH ZBASE32 1 "February 2026" "BaseX 0.9.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zbase32 \- compress and encode data to Base32 format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zbase32
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zbase32
compresses data using Zstandard and encodes it to Base32 format (RFC 4648).
Base32 uses only alphanumeric characters (A\-Z, 2\-7), making it safe for
case\-insensitive systems and URLs.
.PP
With no FILE, or when FILE is \-, read standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-decode
Decode and decompress data (reverses the encoding + compression).
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-wrap=\fICOLS\fR
Wrap encoded lines after COLS characters (default 76). Use 0 for no wrapping.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ignore\-garbage
Ignore non\-alphabet characters when decoding (newlines, spaces, etc).
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-level=\fINUM\fR
Set compression level (1\-19, default 9). Higher values provide better
compression but use more CPU time.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-threads=\fINUM\fR
Number of compression threads (default 0 = auto). More threads speed up
compression of large files.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show compression statistics (bytes in/out, compression ratio).
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compress and encode a file:
.RS
$ zbase32 document.pdf > document.zb32
.RE
.PP
Decode and decompress:
.RS
$ zbase32 \-d document.zb32 > document.pdf
.RE
.PP
Use in filenames (case\-insensitive safe):
.RS
$ zbase32 secret.key | tee $(zbase32 \-\-wrap=0 <<< "key").zb32
.RE
.SH PERFORMANCE
Base32 encoding adds 60% size overhead (5 bytes → 8 chars). However,
Zstandard compression typically achieves 2\-3x compression on text files,
making the final size competitive with plain Base64.
.PP
Base32 is ideal when case\-insensitive safety is required (DNS, Windows
filesystems, legacy systems).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR base32 (1),
.BR zbase64 (1),
.BR zbase85 (1),
.BR zstd (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written for the BaseX project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 BaseX Project.
License MIT: <https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>
