.TH ZBASE64 1 "February 2026" "BaseX 0.9.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zbase64 \- compress and encode data to Base64 format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zbase64
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zbase64
compresses data using Zstandard and encodes it to Base64 format (RFC 4648).
This combines high compression ratios with standard Base64 encoding for
compatibility with text-based protocols.
.PP
With no FILE, or when FILE is \-, read standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-decode
Decode and decompress data (reverses the encoding + compression).
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-wrap=\fICOLS\fR
Wrap encoded lines after COLS characters (default 76). Use 0 for no wrapping.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ignore\-garbage
Ignore non\-alphabet characters when decoding (newlines, spaces, etc).
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-level=\fINUM\fR
Set compression level (1\-19, default 9). Higher values provide better
compression but use more CPU time.
.TP
.BR \-T ", " \-\-threads=\fINUM\fR
Number of compression threads (default 0 = auto). More threads speed up
compression of large files.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show compression statistics (bytes in/out, compression ratio).
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Output version information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compress and encode a file:
.RS
$ zbase64 document.pdf > document.zb64
.RE
.PP
Decode and decompress:
.RS
$ zbase64 \-d document.zb64 > document.pdf
.RE
.PP
High compression with verbose output:
.RS
$ zbase64 \-l 19 \-v data.bin > data.zb64
.RE
.SH PERFORMANCE
Base64 encoding adds 33% size overhead. However, Zstandard compression
typically achieves 2\-3x compression on text files, resulting in smaller
final size than plain Base64.
.PP
The compression + encoding pipeline is ~2x faster than separate
compression and encoding steps.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR base64 (1),
.BR zbase32 (1),
.BR zbase85 (1),
.BR zstd (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written for the BaseX project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 BaseX Project.
License MIT: <https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>
